Chapter 32: The Plea Bargain
youtube.com/watch?v=5g-y4rusPFU

The file that Aleksandr Shcherbakov--code name, Mr. Pym--sold to the FBI for seven million dollars contained nothing but bad news for US intelligence agencies and the military.
The file cataloged all the secrets that Hanssen had provided to the KGB.
Even a sampling of the documents formed a startling list.
For example, Hanssen passed to Moscow U.S. analyses of Soviet nuclear missile strengths, including the numbers and effectiveness of its ICBMs and warheads.
He also gave the KGB the CIA's estimate of what Moscow knew about us early warning systems, and about America's ability to retaliate against a massive nuclear attack.
He disclosed to
the KGB the super-secret US continuity
of government plan enabling the Russians
to discover exactly where top United
States leaders from the President on
down would be relocated in the event of
a national emergency that information
took on even greater importance after
the September 11 2001 terrorist attacks
on America Hanson the file revealed also
sold the Russians several documents
describing sensitive satellite
collection and other programs of the
National Security Agency the nation's
code making and global electronic
eavesdropping arm he divulged another
sensitive secret to the KGB that the NSA
was exploiting a vulnerability in Soviet
satellites that enabled Washington to
intercept their communications and of
course he betrayed the FBI NSA
eavesdropping tunnel under the Soviet
embassy in Washington his treachery
killed people when he first began spying
in 1979 for the GRU he had betrayed
top-hat general Dmitri Fedorovich
Poliakov an invaluable source for
American intelligence who was
later executed Hansen also revealed to
the KGB the names of the FBI's two KGB
sources in Washington who were also
executed all three had also been
betrayed by Ames by warning the KGB of
the FBI's investigation of felix bloch
he sank the espionage case the bureau
was developing against the high-level
State Department official Robert Hansen
was facing a possible death penalty he
needed a top lawyer fast and his wife
contacted Plato coach Aris the legendary
criminal defense attorney Qataris agreed
to represent the accused spy he worked
pro bono the government had frozen
Hansen's assets immediately but Qataris
did not mind he loved the attention he
earned from a high-profile Washington
case he thrived on the bright lights and
the television cameras it was not his
first major spy case he had previously
represented Aldrich Ames
he had also defended President Nixon's
attorney general John and Mitchell who
was imprisoned for 19 months for his
role in the Watergate scandal triggered
when Republican operatives broke into
the headquarters of the Democratic
National Committee in 1972 another famed
client was Monica Lewinsky the White
House intern whose romance with
President Bill Clinton led to his
impeachment during the iran-contra
scandal coach Aris represented fawn hall
Oliver North's statuesque Secretary who
famously hid White House documents in
her decolletage more recently he was
quietly retained by Edward J Snowden who
stole thousands of NSA secrets that
revealed widespread government
surveillance of Americans Snowden went
public with his information and escaped
to Moscow he was indicted in the u.s. on
multiple espionage charges but
apparently hoped that Qataris could
negotiate a plea deal that would spare
him major prison time if he returned
home although condemned by critics and
by federal prosecutors
kut'rs for stealing secrets Snowden's
supporters argued that he had exposed
government abuse of the privacy rights
of Americans and had caused the NSA to
abandon its practice of keeping a secret
record of millions of telephone calls
made by ordinary citizens every day
former attorney General Eric Holder said
Snowden had performed a public service
by opening a national debate over
government surveillance but should still
have to pay a penalty for breaking the
law
despite catch arrises somewhat
flamboyant public persona he was a quiet
professional who enjoyed a rock-solid
reputation for integrity among his
fellow lawyers the son of a greek
immigrant who worked as a streetcar
motormen in Chicago and a Greek mother
who insisted he be named Plato Qataris
had built a highly successful lucrative
law practice it allowed him to indulge
his taste for expensive Savile Row suits
bright suspenders and monogrammed shirts
from Denman and Goddard of London he
grew up in the Maryland suburbs and in
Washington join the Marines graduated
from Georgetown Law School and married
his longtime girlfriend
Ethel Dominic a major goal of Qataris
was to save Hansen from the death
penalty which had been restored for some
types of espionage crimes in the wake of
the Ames case Attorney General John
Ashcroft helped to tear us out with a
blunder he told an interviewer that he
would not hesitate to consider the death
penalty for Hansen catch errors quickly
lodged an official complaint pointing
out that federal prosecution guidelines
prohibit using the death penalty as a
threat to gain advantage in a possible
plea bargain qataris had other cards to
play it would be very difficult to
prosecute Hansen without revealing the
secrets he had passed to Moscow and the
government was reluctant to broadcast
them to the world moreover mr. Pym would
likely have to be a key witness in any
trial although he was willing to testify
if absolutely necessary the FBI wanted
to keep his identity secret if it
his true name FBI codename and the story
of how he was persuaded to provide the
KGB file is told in this book for the
first time Robert Hansen was not
identified as the mole inside US
intelligence until his voice was
recognized on the tape that mr. Pym
provided to the FBI did the KGB never
identify him during all the years he was
passing secrets to them Hansen
communicated via dead-drops and letters
but the Russians knew when and where he
might appear at a dead drop or a signal
sight weren't they tempted to stake out
a drop and photograph both Hansen and
his car to try to learn who he was some
experienced counterintelligence agents
scoff at the idea that the KGB would not
over a period of 16 years have
discovered Hanson's identity because he
drove his car to drop and signal sites
it would not have been difficult to
photograph his license plate and learn
the owner from public motor vehicle
records the Russians could have done so
any time up to July 1st 1994 on that
date a new law took effect in Virginia
where Hansen's cars were registered
protecting driver privacy under the
state law the name and address of the
owner of a license plate was no longer a
public record or the KGB might even have
followed him to his home or office but
if the KGB placed Hansen under
surveillance they would be taking an
enormous risk of losing their most
valuable source in America Hanson was a
counterintelligence officer and if he
spotted the surveillance he would go to
ground he would no longer fill dead
drops for the KGB
apparently the KGB decided not to take
that risk according to a senior FBI
official to our knowledge they did not
try to surveil him there's nothing in
the file to indicate they knew who he
was
Hansen was imprisoned in the Alexandria
County Detention Center after a federal
judge said he posed
a severe flight risk the CIA opposed the
death penalty for Hansen the
Intelligence Agency and the FBI were
much more interested in finding out how
Hansen had managed to steal so many
secrets for the KGB the CIA had launched
a damage assessment getting Hansen to
cooperate as part of a plea bargain was
the goal of the intelligence agencies.
If Hanssen was executed, the CIA would never learn the full extent of what had been compromised from the file that Alexander Shcherbakov had produced.
The FBI and the CIA had a lengthy index to the files that Hanssen had disclosed, but the intelligence agencies could not be certain that Mr. Pym had managed to copy the title of every file that Hanssen had transmitted to the KGB.
They wanted to question him in detail and construct
their own damage assessment George Tenet
the CIA director wrote to Ashcroft
arguing that it was crucial to
interrogate Hansen rather than execute
him on April 18th the lead prosecutor
Randi I bellows an assistant US attorney
in Alexandria met with Qataris to
discuss for the first time the
possibility of a deal the government
wanted Hansen to admit his spying in
return for a sentence of life in prison
the prosecutor warned that the death
penalty was still possible the
government had a double motive in
discussing a plea bargain in addition to
learning from Hansen exactly what damage
he had wrought it hoped to avoid the
public exposure of the secrets that he
had passed the secrets had already been
sold to the Soviet Union
yet the extent of the damage was
concealed from the American people the
US intelligence agencies were appalled
at the thought of the public learning
secrets that were already known to the
KGB the adversary from whom the secrets
were primarily designed to be concealed
a month later in May Qataris and bellos
met again the Justice Department
had still not decided whether to seek
the death penalty Bello said he asked
for more time Qataris playing hardball
refused and broke off the talks Qataris
was well aware that the government did
not want the secrets that Hansen had
given to Moscow exposed in a trial and
it was impossible Qataris contended for
the government to prove that his client
was responsible for the deaths of the
two KGB officers in Washington whom he
had betrayed we argued that you can't
blame Hansen for the deaths of Martin
off and Motorin because Ames had already
given them up months earlier we also
argued the government had a statute of
limitations problem on May 31st Hansen
pleaded not guilty in a two-minute
appearance under heavy security at the
federal courthouse in Alexandria judge
Claude M Hilton
set a trial date for October 29th but
kircheis was not willing to gamble on a
trial you never know what a jury will do
he told me and juries in Virginia can be
particularly harsh there are a lot of
military people in Northern Virginia
Virginia jurors are conservative they
are sophisticated and they might find
what he gave the Russians highly
offensive early in June coach Harris
telephoned bellows and suggested they
meet privately to see whether the talks
about a plea bargain might be reopened
by that time Ashcroft was no longer
trumpeting the death penalty giving
bellows more room to negotiate
the deal was struck Hansen would plead
guilty and promised to cooperate by
revealing everything he had done Qataris
had saved Robert Hansen from the death
penalty
the compromise gave both sides what they
wanted before the plea bargain was
finalized however the government wanted
to hear what Hansen was prepared to
reveal the prosecutors would not sign
the agreement unless Hansen demonstrated
that he was willing to cooperate the
test known as a proffer took place in a
windowless room in the basement of the
federal courthouse there were two such
meetings and Hansen was given a type of
limited immunity from prosecution for
what he revealed as Hansen agreed to
enter his plea guilty ashcroft
in a statement said the decision to
forego the death penalty was based on
the strong recommendation of the
intelligence community On June 21st
cachoeira sand John C Hundley his
partner in the law firm arrived for the
meeting as the lawyers for the
government and for the defense chatted
and milled about federal marshals
brought in Hansen wearing a green
jumpsuit with the word prisoner on the
back they removed the manacles from his
hands the two sides took their places at
a long polished table in the underground
room Doug Gregory and the other FBI case
agent stefan Pluta sat across from
Hansen and the defense team the Justice
Department was represented by Randy
bellows and John Dion the chief of the
Internal Security section
Doug Gregory did most of the questioning
Preston Burton a Qataris partner was
delayed by a court appearance and
arrived late he realized that Hansen was
not performing well five hours later the
proffer session ended the Charis and his
partners were dismayed Hansen might be
blowing the deal he would have one more
chance to redeem himself at another
meeting set for a week later at the
second meeting Hansen was more focused
after seven hours of questioning it was
clear that the deal would go through the
court had agreed in advance that the
plea bargain would be binding under
federal rules a judge does not have to
accept a plea bargain worked out by the
prosecution and the defense but once the
court accepts the arrangement it becomes
final in working out the details of the
plea the defense lawyer said that Hansen
was anxious to have access to a computer
in prison but the government aware of
Hansen's technical skills wanted to
prohibit him from using a computer even
one with no modem that would allow
to dial out do you think this guy is the
professor on Gilligan's Island
Burton asked do you think he's gonna
make a radio out of a coconut Hanson had
another complaint three months after the
9/11 attacks
Zacarias Moussaoui a French citizen was
brought to the Alexandria jail to await
trial in federal court on charges of
conspiring in the terrorist attacks
vasawi was arrested when he aroused
suspicion at a flight school in
Minnesota saying he wanted to train to
fly jumbo jets when Misawa arrived
Hanson was moved from his cell to
another floor to make room for the new
prisoner in the shift his privileges
were curtailed for a while
he had no access to books or TV I'm
being treated like a common criminal he
complained to Bonnie on July 6th Hansen
in his green prison uniform stood before
Judge Hilton again and pleaded guilty to
15 counts of espionage attempted
espionage and conspiracy six counts were
dropped by the government Larry Thompson
the Deputy Attorney General told the
court that the interest of the United
States would be best served by allowing
the government to assess the damage
wrought by Hansen an objective we could
not achieve if we sought and obtained
the death penalty against him under the
plea agreement Hansen would be sentenced
to life without the possibility of
parole he would forfeit the 1.4 million
dollars paid or set aside for him by the
Russians and could not benefit from any
book film or future publicity and he was
to be debriefed for six months about his
spying the formal sentencing of Hansen
was not to take place until after the
debriefings were concluded and the
prosecutors were satisfied
soon after Hansen's guilty plea the
twice-weekly debriefings began in the
same windowless room in the basement of
the federal courthouse
Doug Gregory led the FBI team and Paul
Redmond the
former CIA counterintelligence
specialist who led the damage assessment
was there as well as other CIA officials
most of the debriefings went smoothly
but Hansen got into a physical
altercation at one session with an FBI
polygraph operator after the test the
polygraph operator sat down with Hanson
and said there were problems with the
results there was a conflict between his
account and that of Priscilla Hsu gayly
the trouble started when the first
question the polygrapher asked was
whether Hanson had a sexual relationship
with the stripper in fact she had oral
sex with him in Hong Kong
Hanson angrily denied a sexual
relationship and his anger apparently
affected his responses to other
questions as well later Hanson explained
to the Webster commission that
investigated his spying that he felt a
one-time event in Hong Kong was not a
sexual relationship a rationale that
echoed President Clinton's famous
finger-wagging denial of sex with Monica
Lewinsky the polygraph operator told
Hanson there was another problem aside
from the conflicts between his account
and gay Lee's the readout from the
Machine suggested that he had not fully
disclosed what happened to all the cash
he had received from the Russians
Hanson insisted he had accounted for all
of the money but the polygraph operator
was not satisfied he told Hanson he had
failed his test and that as a result
Bonnie's pension might be taken away
Hanson lost it he lunged for the man who
jerked backwards out of the way
Hanson landed no blows and the fracas
was quickly over it was in the midst of
the initial plea bargain talks in
mid-may of 2001 that Bonnie Hanson
learned that her husband had allowed his
best friend to watch them having sex
both live and later on closed-circuit
television she had reacted with shock
and anger what Bonnie had told her
sister Jean Berglas was brief and
unforgettable my husband is a traitor
and a pervert Hansen had pleaded guilty
and the debriefings of the former FBI
agent went on for many months the
counter spies seemed reasonably pleased
with the answers they were getting from
him but they were not done with Boni
Hansen some of the Justice Department
lawyers still harbored suspicions that
she knew of her husband's continued
espionage beyond 1980 after he said he
had stopped in March 2002 Boni Hansen
went to the Justice Department to answer
questions by the lawyers conducting the
internal inquiry of the case they took
her into the bubble a soundproof secure
room for the all-day session two months
later she was read her Miranda rights by
the department lawyers and given a
polygraph she had a tough lawyer
Janine Bruckner a former CIA station
chief who had been mistreated and
falsely accused of various infractions
by the agency but won a lawsuit against
it and received a substantial settlement
Bruckner watched the lie-detector test
through a one-way mirror and said that
bonny had passed it in a 2002 interview
with reporter James risin of the New
York Times Boni Hansen said that after
her husband promised he had stopped
spying in 1980 she questioned him to
make sure he was overtime paying the
thirty thousand dollars he had received
from the Russians to the mother Teresa
charity he said he was Bonnie Hansen
according to Bruckner also said during
the lie-detector test that over the next
few years she asked her husband whether
he was again working for the Russians
and he always denied it the FBI and the
prosecutors found Bonnie Hansen to have
been fully cooperative with the
government as did the damage assessment
group which noted she had met with our
psychological evaluation team to discuss
various aspects of her husband's
psychological makeup and disposition the
Justice Department's inspector general
was rather more cautious in choosing his
words but concluded that based
the evidence available to us now we
cannot state that she has been
untruthful in answering questions as a
result of her cooperation
the prosecutors informed the court she
was entitled to her husband's survivors
benefit under Hansen's plea bargain she
also was allowed to keep their house and
three cars on may 10th 2002 Hanson gaunt
in his green prison uniform
he had lost 70 pounds in jail appeared
before Judge Hilton again in the
Alexandria federal courthouse the
courtroom was packed with grim faced FBI
agents many of whom had worked with
Hanson in counterintelligence before he
was sentenced Hansen arose and read a
statement I apologize for my behavior he
said I am shamed by it he had caused
great harm to my totally innocent wife
and children I have hurt so many deeply
moments later judge Hilton sentenced
Hansen to life in prison with no
possibility of parole
Bonnie Hansen and the children were not
in the courtroom
